International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013), pp.187-194
http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/ijunesst.2013.6.6.17
ISSN: 2005-4246 IJUNESST
Copyright  2013 SERSC
E-Commerce or Internet Marketing: A Business Review from
Indian Context
D. K. Gangeshwer
Department of Mathematics, Bhilai Institute of Technology (BIT), Durg, (C.G),
INDIA
dgangeshwar@yahoo.co.in
Abstract
This paper deals the conceptual knowledge of search engine marketing (SEM) or e-
commerce, literature review, current and future aspects of e-commerce in Indian context.
This paper discussed about the top motivator factors of shopping online. The present
development would be a valuable addition to researcher and academicians; and useful
theory for practitioners, advertisers, and entrepreneurs.
Keywords: SEM, Online Marketing or E-commerce, Pay-per-click (PPC)
1. Introduction
Khan and Mahapatra (2009) remarked that technology plays a vital role in improving
the quality of services provided by the business units. One of the technologies which
really brought information revolution in the society is Internet Technology and is rightly
regarded as the third wave of revolution after agricultural and industrial revolution. The
cutting edge for business today is e-Commerce. The effects of e-commerce are already
appearing in all areas of business, from customer service to new product design. It
facilitates new types of information based business processes for reaching and interacting
with customers like online advertising and marketing, online order taking and online
customer service etc. It can also reduce cost in managing orders and interacting with a
wide range of suppliers and trading partners, areas that typically add significant overheads
to the cost of products and services [Rajiv Rastogi]. Businesses are increasingly using the
Internet for commercial activities. The ubiquitous nature of the Internet and its wide
global access has made it an extremely effective mode of communication between
businesses and customers [Rowley (2001)]. Thompson (2005) introduced that the growth
of Internet technology has enormous potential as it reduces the costs of product and
service delivery and extends geographical boundaries in bringing buyers and sellers
together.
Devendra et. al., (2012) defined that electronic commerce, commonly known as e-
commerce or eCommerce, consists of the buying and selling of products or services over
electronic system such as internet and other computer network. Intent is the technology
for e-commerce as it offers easier ways to access companies and individuals at very low
cost n order to carry out day-to-day business transactions. Search engine marketing
(SEM) is a form of web advertising that companies use to promote their products and
services on search engine results pages (SERPs). SEM is focused on the effective use of
search engine advertisements (a.k.a., sponsored results, sponsored links) that appear on
the SERP. SEM which allows firms to target consumers by placing ads on search engines
has proven to be an effective audience acquisition strategy. Unlike traditional online
advertising, advertisers pay only when users actually click on an ad when successfully
implemented, SEM can generate steady traffic levels and tremendous return on
investment (ROI).
International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013)
188 Copyright  2013 SERSC
Boughton (2005) remarked that most online advertising campaigns have two main
objectives: brand development and direct response. Selecting an appropriate marketing
channel ultimately depends on which strategies will provide the greatest ROI. Firms that
offer products and services through the Web clearly stand to gain from Internet
advertising because their prospective customers are already online. Non web-based
companies may choose online marketing in order to increase exposure and promote brand.
SEM allows companies to closely track their ROI from an audience acquisition
standpoint. SEM delivers ads to users who are already searching for the products or
services that an advertiser is offering, meaning that theoretically, they are only receiving
qualified traffic. Unlike traditional banner ads, advertisers are charged based on the
number of clicks they receive, not on the number of impressions (number of times an ad
appears). Furthermore, many marketing campaigns place a great deal of importance on
branding. PPC ads can be very effective in terms of driving home a brand name because
they appear alongside search results for thousands of different search terms. SEM is a
form of Internet marketing that involves the promotion of websites by increasing their
visibility in SERP through optimization (both on-page and off-page) as well as through
advertising (paid placements, contextual advertising, and paid inclusions) [Search Engine
Land 2007].
This paper deals the conceptual knowledge of search engine marketing or e-commerce,
literature review, current and future aspects of e-commerce in Indian context. This paper
discussed about the top motivator factors of shopping online. The present development
would be a valuable addition to researcher and academicians; and useful theory for
practitioners, advertisers, and entrepreneurs. The further research areas are; the quality of
sponsored ad text, ad position, Search Engine Optimization (SEO), PageRank, yellow
pages, bid management etc.
2. Literature Review
Literature on web theory is scant because it is a relatively a new area and the
technologists at the forefront of Web design are typically not sufficiently academically
inclined to formulate the relevant theories (Day, 1997). While previous research has
examined Internet usage (Teo, Lim, & Lai, 1999), commercial websites (Gonzalez and
Palacios, 2004), website design (Kim, Shaw, & Schneider, 2003), website effectiveness
from the consumers' perspective (Bell & Tang, 1998), pricing paid placements on search
engine (Sen et. al., 2008), and bidding (Bernard and Simone, 2011). This form of online
advertising emerged in 1998 [Fain and Pedersen 2006], rapidly has become the central
business model of the major search engines [Jansen and Mullen 2008], and is one of the
most rapidly growing segments of the online marketing area [SEMPO Research 2009]
Search engine has become a necessity for people to surf the web [Hsien-Tsung Chang,
2011]. It is a simple user interface is designed. Any user simply fills in several fields and
the system makes the decision about what to find, where to search and how to look at. The
threshold of search is lowered. SEM is an internet marketing model aiming at promoting
the ranking of websites in the search engine's search results page which can make a web
site introduce into more web users and website traffic [iProspect 2008]. Li-Hsing HO et.
al., (2011) explained about exploration of SEO technology applied in internet marketing,
Kesharwani and Tiwari (2011) studied the importance of website quality towards the
success or failure of any e-vendor. Khan and Mahapatra (2009) studied that the quality of
internet banking (i-banking) services in India from customer's perspective. Malhotra and
Singh (2007) carried out a research to find the i-banking adoption by the banks in India.
Thus, it is high time that India should act fast and decisively in order to use the growing
electronic trade to our advantage.
International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013)
Copyright  2013 SERSC 189
3. Types of E-Commerce
Waghmare G.T. (2012) has defined the following types of e-commerce:
(i) B2B E-Commerce: Companies doing business with each other such as manufacturers
selling to distributors and wholesalers selling to retailers. Pricing is based on quantity
of order and is often negotiable.
(ii) B2C E-Commerce: Businesses selling to the general public typically through cataloes
utilizing shopping cart software. By dollar volume, B2B takes the prize, however
B2C is really what the average Joe has in mind with regards to ecommerce as a
whole. for example indiatimes.com.
(iii) C2C E-Commerce: There are many sites offering free classifieds, auctions, and
forums where individuals can buy and sell thanks to online payment systems like
PayPal where people can send and receive money online with ease. eBay's auction
service is a great example of where customer-to customer transactions take place
every day.
(iv) Others: G2G (Government-to-Government), G2E (Government-to-Employee), G2B
(Government-to-Business), B2G (Business-to-Government).
4. E-Commerce in India
The internetworldstates.com shows that Asia has 44.8% internet users in the world
distributed by world regions 2012 Q2.
Source: Internet World Stats ­www.internetworldstates.com/stats.htm
Waghmare (2012) pointed out that many countries in Asia are taking advantage of
Ecommerce through opening of economies, which is essential for promoting competition
and diffusion of Internet technologies. Large enough to have a critical mass of 10 to 20
million users to be able to make an impact on e-commerce and e-governance. In the next
3 to 5 years, India will have 30 to 70 million Internet users which will equal, if not
surpass, many of the developed countries. Internet economy will then become more
meaningful in India. With the rapid expansion of internet, Ecommerce, is set to play a
very important role in the 21st century, the new opportunities that will be thrown open,
will be accessible to both large corporations and small companies. A recent report by the
44.80%
21.50%
11.40%
10.40%
7%
3.70%1%
Internet Users in the World Distribution by World Regions Q2
2012
Asia 44.8%
Europe 21.5%
North America 11.4%
Lat Am 10.4%
Africa 7%
Middle East 3.7%
Australia 1%
International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013)
190 Copyright  2013 SERSC
Internet and Mobile Association of India (IMAI) reveals that India' a e-commerce market
is growing at an average rate of 70 percent annually, and has grown over 500 percent in
the past three years alone [geocart.com].
Zia and Manish (2012) proposed that ecommerce revenues in India will increase by
more than five times by 2016, jumping from US$1.6 billion in 2012 to US$8.8 billion in
2016 (As shown in Figure 1)
Source: Forrester Research Online Retail Forecast 2011 to 2016
Economic times (2013) stated that the next billion users will come from emerging
markets, with at least a fourth from "India". Half of those without net access now live in
just 5 countries: India Indonesia, China, Pakistan & Bangladesh. Another newspaper
Times of india (2013) written that leading online stores such as Indiatimes Shopping,
Jabong and Myntra say that almost half, and in some cases more than half, of their sales
now come from tier-II and tier-III towns and cities. E-commerce in the country grew 128
per cent year-on-year last year, with 25 per cent traffic coming from places outside the top
20 cities, it says.
Shoppers in Metropolitan India
Zia and Manish (2012) found that, currently, shoppers in metropolitan India are driving
eCommerce: These consumers are primarily buying travel, consumer electronics, and
books online. And although spending per online buyer remains low, some 59% of online
consumers in metropolitan India already make purchases online at least monthly.
Shoppers in non-metropolitan India
Consumers in nonmetropolitan areas will also help fuel growth; unlike online
consumers in cities, they are more likely to shop online for goods that are unavailable at
local stores. Zia and Manish (2012) estimated that eCommerce retailers in India are
expanding their offerings to the online population outside metropolitan India and are
investing heavily in the infrastructure to support these cities.10 Online apparel retailer
Myntra.com is already seeing demand for its products outside metropolitan India: 50% of
its sales are outside India's 10 biggest cities. To widen their reach, for example, multiple
retailers are building warehouses outside central locations; testing shipping options that
work in rural areas; offering payment options like cash on delivery (COD) that provide
options for the unbanked; and subsequently marketing these to semi-urban and rural
consumers.
Moreover, Aditya Kulkarni , Product Manager at Google (Jan 15, 2013) pointed out
that India maybe behind the curve on the numbers, but they are growing fast, and when
they reach the 200-300 million online shoppers, you can safely assume that there will at
1.6
8.8
0
2
4
6
8
10
2012 2016
Revenue (in US $ Billion)
Year
Forecast: India Online Retail Revenues (B2B and B2C)
International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013)
Copyright  2013 SERSC 191
least be as many e-Commerce players in India as there are in China. That is to say, there
will be at least 10-20 successful, large and growing e-Commerce companies in India over
the next few years!. I think the successful companies of tomorrow are going to look
different from the ones that are on the top now. There's going to be 100-200 million new
e-Commerce customers that are going to be up for grabs in the next few years. Another
way to look at it is that in 80% of the e-Commerce shoppers of 2016 still are available to
be nabbed by e-Commerce sites. And they're going to come from predominantly two
categories. First, from Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities as the logistics and connectivity there
improve and second, young people that get jobs/pocket-money and start shopping online
5. Major Search Engines in the Market
By distinct search engines, means that search engines, portals, and websites who have
alliances and who solicit bids for paid placements from a single source are treated as one
search engine. For instance, by successfully bidding for a paid link with Overture exposes
a seller to traffic from several websites, including MSN, Yahoo!, AltaVista, InfoSpace,
AlltheWeb and NetZero. There are various search engines by content/topic such as Baidu
(Chinese, Japanese), Bing, Blekko, Google, Sogou (Chinese), Soso.com (Chinese),
Volunia, WireDoo, Yahoo!, Yandex (Russian), Yebol, and Yodao (Chinese). Among PPC
providers, Google AdWords, Yahoo! Search Marketing, and Microsoft adCenter are the
three largest network operators, and all three operate under a bid-based model.
6. The Advantages and Disadvantages of Internet Marketing
Melody and Robert (2001) remarked that the Internet can provide timely information to
customers because of its ability for instant communication, and its availability 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week [Lane, 1996]. On-line marketing offers more choices and flexibility
[Lamoureux, 1997] and, at the same time, eliminates huge inventories, storage costs,
utilities, space rental, etc., [Avery, 1997]. People tend to associate Internet marketing with
direct marketing because companies participating in online marketing usually shortened
the supply chain [Edwards, et al., 1998] and reduced commission and operating costs. The
ability to serve as both a transaction medium and a physical distribution medium for
certain goods is a unique feature of Internet marketing. Such advantages can be best
realized by companies that provide digital products/services such as software, music,
news, consulting services, online ticketing and reservations, telemedicine, insurance,
banking, stock brokerage, tax, and other financial service industries. Using the Internet as
the distribution channel can reduce not only the delivery cost substantially, but also
ensures instant delivery of products/services.
Moreover, Ruckman (2012) suggested that Internet research becomes an increasingly
important tool during the purchasing process; more marketers are seeing the advantages
too. It's a win-win situation. Marketing departments are investing more into online
marketing today because it's:
 Attractive to a significant segment of the demographics for most
customer profiles. It can effectively reach the target customer.
 Faster and less expensive to conduct direct marketing campaigns
 Measurable, which means that successes are identifiable and repeatable
 Open 24-hours a day
 Cost-effective, in the long run.
Disadvantages:
There is no actual face-to-face contact involved in the Internet communication. For the
types of products that rely heavily on building personal relationship between buyers and
sellers such as the selling of life insurance, and the type of products that requires physical
International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013)
192 Copyright  2013 SERSC
examination, Internet marketing maybe less appropriate. While internet marketing cannot
allow prospective buyers to touch, or smell or taste or 'try on' the products, However a
survey of consumers of cosmetics products shows that email marketing can be used to
interest a consumer to visit a store to try a product or to speak with sales representatives
[Martin at el (2003)]. Some of the disadvantages of e-Marketing are dependability on
technology, Security, privacy issues, Maintenance costs due to a constantly evolving
environment, Higher transparency of pricing and increased price competition, and
worldwide competition through globalization.
5. Top Motivators for Shopping Online
Times of India (February 12, 2013) has published that top motivators for shopping
online which include cash back guarantee, cash on delivery, fast delivery, substantial
discounts compared to retail, and access to branded products, while barriers include
inability to touch and try products before purchase, fear of faulty products, apprehension
of posting personal and financial details online and inability to bargain (See Figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1. Top Motivator Factors for Shopping Online
6. Conclusions and Recommendations
This paper deals the conceptual knowledge of search engine marketing or e-commerce,
literature review, current and future aspects of e-commerce in Indian context. This paper
discussed about the top motivator factors of shopping online. The present development
would be a valuable addition to researcher and academicians; and useful theory for
practitioners, advertisers, and entrepreneurs. Some of the disadvantages of e-Marketing
are dependability on technology, Security, privacy issues, Maintenance costs due to a
constantly evolving environment, Higher transparency of pricing and increased price
competition, and worldwide competition through globalization. While considering the
aforesaid limitations; advertisers and end-users can effectively use this modern platform
to make life easier and faster. In the next 3 to 5 years, India will have 30 to 70 million
Internet users which will equal, if not surpass, many of the developed countries. Internet
economy will then become more meaningful in India. With the rapid expansion of
internet, Ecommerce, is set to play a very important role in the 21st century, the new
opportunities that will be thrown open, will be accessible to both large corporations and
Top
Motivator
Factors for
shopping
online
Cash back
guarantee
Cash on
delivery
Fast
delivery
Substantial
discounts
compared
to retail
Access to
branded
products
International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013)
Copyright  2013 SERSC 193
small companies [Waghmare (2012)]. Karoor (2012) explained that Ecommerce
encapsulates many of the dynamics of 21st century of India. The potential huge and wit
and energy of the entrepreneurs in the sector is impressive. Online commerce in India is
destined to grow both in revenue and geographic reach. The further research areas in
ecommerce are; the quality of sponsored ad text, ad position, Search Engine Optimization
(SEO), PageRank, yellow pages, and bid management etc.
References
[1] A. Kulkarni, Product Manager: http://yourstory.in/2013/01/indian-e-commerce-what-does-the-future-
look-like/.
[2] Avery, S. Online tool removes costs from process. Purchasing, vol. 123, no. 6, (1997), pp. 79-81.
[3] S. B. Boughton, Search engine Marketing, Bart Boughton was a student in the MBA program in the
School of Management and Business at St. Edward's University, (2005).
[4] H. Bell and N. K. H. Tang, "The effectiveness of commercial Internet websites: a user's perspective",
Internet Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, vol. 8, no. 3, (1998), pp. 219-228.
[5] J. Bernard and S. Simone, "Bidding on the buying funnel for sponsored search and keyword
advertising", Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 12, no. 1, (2011), pp. 1-18.
[6] A. Day, "A model of monitoring Web site effectiveness", Internet Research: Electronic Networking
Applications and Policy, vol. 7, no. 2, (1997), pp. 109-115.
[7] D. Agrawal, R. P. Agrawal, J. B. Singh and S. P. Tripathi, "E-commerce: True Indian Picture", Journal
of Advances in IT, vol. 3, no. 4, (2012), pp. 250-257.
[8] N. Edwards, S. Handcock and J. Mullen, "Electronic commerce: reality bytes", Supply Management,
vol. 3, no. 8, (1997), pp. 32-34.
[9] D. C. Fain and J. O. Pedersen, "Sponsored Search: A Brief History", Bulletin of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, vol. 32, no. 2, (2006), pp. 12-13.
[10] F. J. M. Gonzalez and T. M. B. Palacios, "Quantitative evaluation of commercial websites: an empirical
study of Spanish firms", International Journal of Information Management, geocart.com :
http://www/geocart.com/online-business-success.asp, vol. 24, no. 4, (2004), pp. 313-328.
[11] H.-T. Chang and S. Wu, "A Switching Proxy for Web Search Engines. Advanced in Information
Sciences and Service Sciences", Advanced Institute of Convergence Information Technology, vol. 3, no.
5, (2011), pp. 52.
[12] IProspect, Information on http://www.iprospect.com/search-engine-marketing-university/, (2008).
[13] B. J. Jansen and T. Mullen, "Sponsored search: An overview of the concept, history, and technology",
International Journal of Electronic Business, vol. 6, no. 2, (2008), pp. 114-131.
[14] U. Karoor, "E-commerce in India: Early Bards expensive worms", Consumer and shopper insights,
(2012).
[15] A. Kesharwani and R. Tiwari, "Exploration of Internet Banking Website Quality in India: A Webqual
Approach", Great Lakes Herald, vol. 5, no. 1, (2011), pp. 40-58.
[16] S. E. Kim, T. Shaw and H. Schneider, "Web site design benchmarking within industry groups", Internet
Research, vol. 13, no. 1, (2003), pp. 17-26.
[17] M. S. Khan and S. S. Mahapatra, "Service quality evaluation in internet banking: an empirical study in
India", Int. J. Indian Culture and Business Management, vol. 2, no. 1, (2009), pp. 30-46.
[18] T. Lamoureux, "IS goes shopping on the web", Computerworld, vol. 31, no. 46, (1997), pp. 106.
[19] L.-H. Ho, M.-H. Lu, C.-P. Lee and T.-F. Peng, "Exploration of Search Engine Optimization Technology
Applied in, Internet Marketing", Advances in Information Sciences and Service Sciences, vol. 3, no. 7,
(2011).
[20] P. Malhotra and B. Singh, "Determinants of internet banking adoption by banks in India", Internet
Research, vol. 17, no. 3, (2007), pp. 323-339.
[21] B. A. S. Martin, J. Van Durme, M. Raulas and M. Merisavo, "E-mail Marketing: Exploratory Insights
from Finland", Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 43, no. 3, (2003), pp. 293-300.
[22] M. Y. Kiang and R. T. Chi, "A framework for analyzing the potential benefits of internet marketing",
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 2, no. 4, (2001), pp. 157-163.
[23] R. Rastogi, "Country Report on E-Commerce (India, Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology", Department of Information Technology, Office of the Controller of Certifying
Authorities), pp. 133-146.
[24] J. Rowley, "Remodeling marketing communications in an Internet environment", Internet Research,
Electronic Networking: Applications and Policy, vol. 11, no. 3, (2001), pp. 203-212.
[25] R. R. Ruckman, http://www.imgrind.com/10-advantages-of-internet-marketing/10 Advantages Of
Internet Marketing, (2012) January 19.
[26] SEMPO Research, "The State of Search Engine Marketing 2008 Survey of Advertisers and Agencies
Search Engine Marketing Professional Organization", SEMPO, February, Search Engine Marketing
Professional Organization, (2009).
International Journal of u- and e- Service, Science and Technology
Vol.6, No.6 (2013)
194 Copyright  2013 SERSC
[27] R. Sen, S. Bandyopadhyay, J. D. Hess and J. Jaisingh, "Pricing paid placements on search engine",
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 9, no. 1, (2008), pp. 33-50.
[28] T. S. H. Teo, V. K. G. Lim and R. Y. C. Lai, "Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in Internet usage",
Omega, vol. 27, (1999), pp. 25-37.
[29] T. S. H. Teo, "Usage and effectiveness of online marketing tools among Business-to-Consumer", B2C,
firms in Singapore, International Journal of Information Management, vol. 25, (2005), pp. 203-213.
[30] Times of india: http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/tech/tech-news/internet/50-sales-of-e-commerce-
sites-like-Indiatimes-Shopping-Myntra-Jabong-from-tier-II-III-cities/articleshow/18460504.cms, (2013)
[31] G. T. Waghmare, "E-commerce; A Business Review and Future Prospects in Indian Business", Internet
Marketing in India: Indian Streams Research Journal, vol. 2, no. IV, (2012), pp. 1-4.
[32] Z. daniell Wigder and M. Bahl, "Trends in India's eCommerce Market", Forrester Research, Inc.,
http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-02-13/news/37079231_1_mobile-users-net-access-
feature-phones, (2012) August 13.
Author
Dr. D. K. Gangeshwar (1978), Ph. D (Statistics), is working as a
Sr. Assistant Professor in the Bhilai Institute of Technology (BIT),
Chhattisgarh Swami Vivekananda Technical University (CSVTU),
Bhilai, Durg (C.G), India. His areas of subjects are Statistical
Quality Control (SQC), Quantitative Techniques in Management,
Optimization Methods, Research Methodology, and Econometrics
and Decision Models. He has served as Sr. Business Analyst with
Boonze Media Solution Pvt Ltd (BMS), Chennai for 4 years in the
various fields of Search Engine Marketing (SEM), and Search
Engine Optimization (SEO). He has published half a dozen
research papers in various national and international journals.
